In the Acta Isidori we have a trail scene, set at the imperial court in Rome, in which Isidorus and Lampon, aggressively proud Alexandrian elites, argue with the emperor Claudius. From what we can gather, Isidorus seems to have been a prosecutor or informer, a delator of sorts, in the court of Claudius’s predecessor, Caligula. Now Isidorus is accusing King Agrippa of something, despite Claudius’ warnings to be careful because he has brought down friends of his in the past. One of these friends is a very interesting person. Naevius is surely Naevius Sertorius Macro, the Praetorian Prefect who, according to Tacitus, engineered the downfall of Tiberius’ powerful Praetorian Prefect Sejanus and Caligula’s succession. 

Isidorus, Lampon, and Balbillus are also known figures. Philo, an elite, Hellenized Jew from Alexandria, casts the first two as some of the chief villains in the Greek-Jewish tensions roiling Alexandria in the 30’s, which exploded in a spasm of violence in 38, when the Jews were ultimately forced into the Delta quadrant of the city and pillaged. Two sets of ambassadors went to Rome in the aftermath of the riots, one Greek and one Jewish, with Philo being a member of the Jewish delegation and whose political pamphlets we still have. According to Philo, Isidorus was in exile in Roman and was involved with the prosecution of Aulus Avilius Flaccus, the Prefect of Egypt, whose actions in 38 added fuel to the fire. Here, then, we seem to have further evidence of Isidorus’s activity in Rome. 

Finally, King Agrippa is either M. Julius Agrippa, Herod the Great’s grandson, also known as Herod Agrippa (11 BCE – 44CE), whose visit to Alexandria in 38 was the spark that ignited city. If so, the dramatic date of our text is likely 41. If not, it is his son by the same name and the last of the Herodians (27/28 – 93/94), and the year is 52 or 53. Sadly, although the text begins with the date, the year is lost in a lacuna, and there are arguments for and against both dates.

Besides the historical grounding, two other features of this trial scene stand out. 

The first is the prominence of Isidorus’s anti-Semitism. The Greek-Jewish violence of 38 and the dueling embassies that subsequently travelled to Rome gave birth a complex literary response, and we should imagine that this text originally circulated and competed with Philo’s pamphlets, dueling forms of ex post facto political spin literature in the ensuing cold war between the Greek and Jewish factions. Anti-Semitism is a constant feature of the first century of Acta texts, as they update the conflict between Alexandrians, Jews, and Roman authorities in each successive generation from Caligula to Hadrian. We should recall that between 38 and 130 the Jews had revolted three times against the imperial order, with the Jews in Alexandrian and Egypt deeply involved in the revolts of 66-70 and 115-117. The last revolt engulfed much of Egypt and resulted in the decimation of the Jewish population and generations of hatred and prejudice. We know from one petition to Severus and Caracalla that Oxyrhynchos celebrated the victory in the “war” against the Jews a century later (P.Oxy. III 705 = CPJ 450), when most of Acta texts were copied. So, while it is important to note that the Acta texts are not merely vehicles for anti-Semitic sentiment, such feelings helped to maintain a market for this literature in Egypt even as late as the third century. 

Second, although the Acts of Isidore appear to have a historical basis, they also seem to be a species of fiction. Isidorus is aggressively, suicidally proud, repeatedly insulting Claudius in front of his consistory. Are we to imagine that Claudius or any Roman emperor would have suffered being spoken to like this? Hardly. Do we believe that this conversation would have been recorded? Supposing it was, would it have been made accessible? At best, it is based on some sort of minutes. However we imagine the relationship between the original source documents and our texts, it is clear that Alexandrian patriotism and heroism in the fact of Roman tyranny is the unifying literary theme driving the production, if not always the reading, of these texts. Also interesting is the fact that in the act of composition, the some of features of a documentary protocol should have either been retained or superadded.

But, what are we reading? 

Form

The protocol form of the texts, combined with the basic historicity of the characters and even occasional Latinisms, led the first scholars who read these texts to see the Acta as essentially documentary. But as more and more of these texts appeared, it became clear to everyone working on them that they were dealing with some sort of literary phenomenon. Theories abounded. They were part of a lost history of Alexandria; they were the generic cousins or perhaps even the direct ancestors of the Christian martyr acts; they were historical romance; they were all fragments of the work of single author in the early third century; they were politically-motivated embellishments of real documentary sources. That is to say these texts had gone from belonging to the wide documentary genre, protocol, to a limbo of almost total generic uncertainty: Were they one text or many texts? Were they examples of a wider genre of martyr texts or history or romance, or were they themselves their own genre? What was their origin, their genetic relationship to other texts, their literary analogs? 

The period of generic debate was most intense in the first quarter of the 20th century, but the defining moment in the modern interpretation of these texts was the defining scientific, critical edition of the Acta in 1954 by the Oxford-educated, Jesuit classics professor, Herbert Musurillo. In his preface, Musurillo states that his interest in the Acta began with his reading of an article by C.B. Welles in TAPA in 1936 – at age 18! – on a new fragment of what Welles called “The Acts of the Heathen Martyrs of Alexandria,” “a humble offshoot of a class of literature popular in the first centuries of the Christian Era.” Welles in his first footnote traced his understanding of this class of popular literature to one of the earliest attempts to class these texts as literature, an article in 1901 by Adolf Bauer in the first volume of Archiv für Papyrusforschung, edited by Ulrich Wilcken, himself not only a major ancient historian and one of the first papyrologists (a term coined only at the turn of the century), but also a major participant in the debate over the basic historicity and generic nature of the Acta. Bauer’s article was, in fact, the first to apply a new and definite literary genre to the texts, identifying them as heidnische Märtyrenakten, assimilating them to Christian martyr acts. His was the label that stuck, accounting for Musurillo’s choice of title for his edition, even though he himself went to some pains to distance them from the Christian martyr acts, reflected in his preference for the term he uses in his subtitle, the Acta Alexandrinorum.

It is hard to overstate the impact of Musurillo’s work on the subsequent interpretation of these texts. By systematically collecting, collating, annotating, and presenting them in a fashion reserved for literary texts, he simultaneously cemented a particular generic orientation and created a canon. This effect was, if anything, amplified by his publication of a second critical edition with Teubner in 1961. Although new pieces were published just as Musurillo submitted his Teubner manuscript, these and all new pieces edited and identified as Acta between 1954 and the first decade of the present century have taken Musurillo’s work as the generic point of departure. To be sure, it was not only Musurillo’s masterly encapsulation of the scholarly debate that preceded him, but also the passing of the first generation of scholarly protagonists and a shifting academic agenda that together account the fifty-year drought that followed. Yet, with the generic questions seemingly settled, the scholarly interest in these texts contracted entirely, and perhaps somewhat ironically, to the realm of ancient history, and in particular the history of Alexandria, the administration of early Roman Egypt, and Jews in the Roman world. For a new synthetic appraisal or theoretical analysis of the Acta one had to wait until the publication of Andrew Harker’s dissertation in 2008. 
